You founded the payment system Braintree in 2007,
that acquired Venmo in, uh, 2012. In that,
in that same year was acquired by PayPal, which is now eBay.
Can you tell me the story, uh,
of the vision and the challenge of building an online in system and just
building a large successful business? In general.
I discovered payments by accident as I was, when I was 21.
I, I just returned from Ecuador, uh, living among extreme poverty for two years.
And I came back to the us and I was shocked by the opulence and
yeah. Of the United States. And I just thought, this is, I couldn't believe it.
And I just decided I wanted to try to spend my life helping others.
Like that was the,
that was a life objective that I thought was worthwhile to pursue versus making
money and whatever the case may be, uh, for its own. Right.
And so I decided that moment that I was going to try to make enough money you by
the age of 30 to never have to work again.
And then with some abundance of money,
I could then choose to do things that might be beneficial to others,
but may not meet the criteria of being, you know, a standalone business.
And so in that process, I started a few companies,
had some small successes, had some, uh, failure in one of the endeavors.
I was up to my eyeballs in debt. Things were not going well.
And I needed a part-time job to pay my bills. Mm-hmm <affirmative>. And so I,
one day I saw in, in the paper in Utah,
where I was living the 50 riches people in Utah,
and I emailed each one of their assistants and said, you know, I I'm young,
I'm resourceful. I'll do anything. I'll just wanna I'm entrepreneurial.
I try to get a job that would be flexible and no one responded.
And then I interviewed at a few dozen places.
Nobody would even give me the time of day, uh, like, well,
no one take me seriously. And so finally, I, it was on monster.com,
but I saw this job posting for credit card sales door to door
commission. <laugh> I did not.
Know the story.
This is great. I love the head drop. That's exactly right. So it was, uh.
The low points to which would go in.
Like <laugh>. So I, I responded and, you know,
the person made an attempt at suggesting that they had some kind of standards
that, that they would consider hiring.
But it's kinda like if you could fog a mirror,
like come and do this because it's a hundred percent commission.
And so I started walking up and down the street in my community selling credit
card processing. And so what you learn immediately in doing that is if you,
you walk into a business, first of all,
the business owner is typically there it's and you walk in the door and they can
tell by how you're dressed or how you walk,
whatever their pattern recognition is.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> and they just hate you immediately.
It's like stop wasting my time. I really am trying to get stuff done.
I don't wanna listen to a sales pitch.
And so you have to overcome the initial get out. And then once you engage,
when you say the word credit card processing, the person's like,
I already hate you because I have been taken advantage of dozens of times
because you all are yeah. Weasel.
And so I had to figure out an algorithm to get past all those different
conditions. Cause I was still working on my other startup. Yeah. Uh,
for the majority of my time I was doing this part-time.
And so I figured out that the industry really was built on
people, uh, on deceit. Uh,
basically people prompted things that, that were not reality.
And so I'd walk into a business, I'd say, look,
I will give you a hundred dollars. I'd put a hundred dollars bill and say,
I will give you a a hundred dollars for three minutes of your time.
If you don't say yes to what I'm saying, I'll give you a hundred dollars.
And then he usually crack a smile and say, okay, what, what he got for me son.
And so I'd sit down and I'd just open my book and I'd say,
here's the credit card industry. Here's how it works. Here are the players.
Here's what they do. Here's how they deceive you. Here's what I am.
I'm no different than anyone else. I it's like,
you're gonna process your credit card.
Are you gonna get the money in the account?
You're just gonna get a clean statement.
You're gonna have someone who answers the call when someone asks and you know,
just like the basic, like you're okay. Yeah. And people started saying yes.
And then of course, I went to the next business and be like, you know,
Joe and Susie and whoever said yes to.
And so I built the social proof structure and I became the number one
salesperson out of 400 people nationwide doing this. And I worked,
you know, half time still doing other startup. And that's a brilliant strategy.
By the way. It's very well, very well strategized and.
Executed. I did it for nine months.
And at the time my customer base was making was generating around.
I think it was six. If I remember correctly, 62,500, $4 a month. Mm-hmm,
<affirmative> where the overall revenues I thought, wow, that's amazing.
If I built that as my own company,
I would just make $62,000 a month of income passively with these merchants
processing credit cards. So I thought, Hmm. And so, uh,
that's when I thought I'm gonna create a company.
And so then I started brain and the idea was the
online world was broken because PayPal had a, uh,
had been acquired by eBay around I think 2000,
1999 or 2000 and eBay had not innovated much with PayPal. So it,
it basically sat still for seven years as the software world moved along
and then authorized.net. It was also a company that was relatively stagnant.
So you basically had software engineers who wanted modern payment tools,
but there were none available for them. And so they just dealt with software.
They didn't like. And so with Braintree,
I thought the entry point is to build software that engineers will love.
And if we can find the entry point via software,
make it easy and beautiful and just a magical experience and then provide
customer service on top. Top of that, that was easy. That would be great.
What I was really going after for though was it was PayPal.
They were the only company in payments making money, uh, because they,
because they had the relationship with eBay early on,
people created a PayPal account,
they'd fund their account with their checking account versus their credit cards.
And then when they'd use PayPal to pay a merchant,
PayPal had a cost of payment of zero. Versus if you have, uh,
coming from a credit card, you have to pay the bank to fees.
So PayPal's margins were 3% on a transaction
versus a typical payments company,
which may be a nickel or a penny or a dime or something like that.
Mm-hmm <affirmative>.
And so I knew a new PayPal really was the model to replicate,
but a bunch of companies had tried to do that.
They tried to come in and build a two-sided marketplace.
So get consumers to fund the checking account and then merchants to accept it.
Mm-hmm <affirmative>,
but they'd all failed because building a two-sided marketplace is very hard at
the same time. So my plan was,
I'm going to build a company and get the best merchants in the whole world to
use our service. Then in year five, I'm going to have,
I'm going to acquire a consumer payments company and I'm going to bring the two
together. Wow. And so focus on the merchant side. Exactly.
And then get the payments.
Company that does the, the customer, the what I of.
The, the other side of it. This is the planet presented, uh,
when I was at the university of Chicago and
weirdly it happened exactly like that. So four,
four years in our customer base included Uber, Airbnb, GitHub,
uh, 37 signals now base camp.
We had a fantastic collection of company that represented
the fastest growing some of the fastest growing tech companies in the world.
And then we met up with Venmo and they had done a remarkable job
in building product. Then something very counterintuitive,
which is make public your private financial transactions,
which people previously thought were something that should be hidden from others
<affirmative> and we acquired Venmo. And at that point, we now had,
we replicated the model cause now people could fund their Venmo account with
their checking account, keep money in the account.
And then you could just plug Venmo as a form of payment.
And so I think PayPal saw that,
that we were getting the best merchants in the world.
We had people using Venmo.
They were both the up and coming millennials at the time who had so much
influence online. And so they came in and offered us, uh,
an attractive number. And my,
my goal was not to build the biggest payments company in the world.
It wasn't to try to climb the Forbes billionaire list.
It was the objective was I want to earn enough money
so that I can basically dedicate my attention to doing something that
could potentially be useful on a society wide skill.
And, um, more importantly,
that could be considered to be valuable from the vanish point of
twenty fifty, twenty one hundred and twenty five hundred.
So thinking about it on a, a few hundred year time scale,
and there was a certain amount of money I needed to do that.
So I didn't require the permission of anybody to do that.
And so that what PayPal offered was sufficient for me to,
to get that amount of money to basically have a go. And that's when I set off to
survey everything,
I could identify in existence to say of anything in the entire world I could do,
what one thing could I do that would actually have the value
potential for the species. And so it took me a little while to,
to arrive at brainer faces, but.
You know,
payments in themselves are revolutionary mm-hmm <affirmative>
technologies that can change the world. Like let's not,
let's not, uh, sort of, um, let's not forget that too easily. I mean,
obviously, you know this, but there's, um,
quite a few lovely folks who are now fascinated with
the space of cryptocurrency mm-hmm <affirmative> and, uh,
where payments are very much connected to this, but in general, just money. And,
uh, many of, of the folks I've, I've spoken with,
they also kind of connect that to not just purely financial discussions,
but philosophical and political discussions. Mm-hmm <affirmative> and, uh,
they see Bitcoin as a way almost as activism
almost as a way to resist mm-hmm <affirmative> the, uh,
the corruption of centralized of centers of power mm-hmm and sort of basically
in the 21st century decentralized control,
whether that's Bitcoin or other cryptocurrencies,
they see that's one possible way to give
power to those that live in, uh, regimes that are corrupt or,
uh, are not respectful, human rights and all those kinds of things.
What's your sense? Just all your expertise with,
with payments and seeing how that changed the world.
What's your sense about the lay of the land for the future of
Bitcoin or other cryptocurrencies in the positive impact they may have in the
world?
Yeah. And to be clear,
my communication wasn't suggest wasn't meant to minimize payments. Yeah.
Or to denigrate it in any way. It was a,
an attempted communication that when I was surveying the world,
it was an algorithm of what could I individually yes.
Do. So there's,
there are things that exist that have a lot of potential that can be done.
And then there's a,
a filtering of how many people are qualified to do this given thing. Yes.
And then there's a further characterization that could be done of, okay.
Given the number of qualified people, will somebody be, uh,
a unique out performer of that group to make something truly impossible,
to be something done that otherwise couldn't get done? So there's,
there's a process of assessing where can you add unique value in the world?
And some of that has to do with you're being very, uh,
very formal and calculative here, but some of that is just like,
what do you sense?
Like part of that equation is how much passion you sense within yourself to be
able to drive that through mm-hmm <affirmative> to discover the possibilities
and make them.
Possible. That's right. And so we, we were, uh, a Braintree.
I think we were the first company to integrate Coinbase into our, uh,
I think we were the first payments company to formally incorporate, uh,
crypto, if I'm not mistaken.
For people who are not familiar,
coin base is a place where you can trade cryptocurrencies.
Yeah. Which was one of the only places you could. So we were early, uh, in,
in doing that. And of course this was in the year 2013.
So an attorney to go in, in cryptocurrency land, I concur with the,
the statements you made of the potential of
the principles, underlying cryptocurrencies,
and that many of the things that they're building in the name of money and
of, and of,
of moving value is equally applicable to the brain
and equally applicable to how the brain interacts with the rest of the world and
how we would imagine doing goal alignment with people. So it's,
to me, it's a continuous spectrum of possibility. And we're talk,
your question is isolated on the money.
And I think it just is basically a scaffolding layer for all society.
So you don't see the.
This money as particularly the.
I don't it's. I think we, we,
at Colonel we will benefit greatly from the progress being made in
cryptocurrency, because it will be a similar technology stack.
We will want to use for many things we want to accomplish.
And so I'm bullish on what's going on and, uh,
think it could greatly enhance, uh,
brain interfaces and the value of the brain interface ecosystem.
I mean, is there something you could say about first of all,
bully on cryptocurrency versus FIAP money?
So do you have a sense that in 21st century cryptocurrency will
be embraced by governments and change the, the,
the face of governments, the structure of governments? It's.
The, it's the same way? I think about
my diet where previously it was conscious Brian
looking at foods in certain biochemical states on I hungry, am I irritated?
Am I depressed? And that I choose based upon those momentary windows.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> do I eat at night when I'm fatigued and I have low will
power, and I gonna pig out on something.
And the current monetary system is based upon human conscious
decision making and politics and power and this whole mess of things.
And what I like about the building blocks of cryptocurrency is
it's methodical, it's structured. It is, uh, accountable,
it's Trent as parent. And so it introduces this scaffolding,
which I think again,
is the right starting point for how we think about building next
generation institutions for society.
And that's why I think it's much broad than much broader than money.
So I guess what you're saying is Bitcoin is the demotion of the conscious mind
as well. In the same way you were talking about diet is like,
uh, giving less priority to the,
the ups and downs of any one particular human mind in this case, your own and,
uh, giving more power to the sort of data driven.
Yes. Yeah. I, I think that is accurate.
That cryptocurrency is
a version of what I would call my autonomous self that I'm trying to build.
Yeah.
It is an introduction of an autonomous system of value
exchange and Val and, and the process yeah.
Of value creation in society. Yes. And so there similarities.
So I guess what you're saying is Bitcoin will somehow help me not out at night
or the equivalent of.